Project Description for Biomedical Information Extraction 

We aim to develop a framework for biomedical information extraction from various sources 
such as biomedical articles, EMR, and other medical documents, which are publicly accessible.  

Our project is, in particular, to focus on PubMed datasets, which pose considerable challenges 
with respect to its size, complexity, and ever-growing content.  Leveraging recent advances 
in Deep Learning, primarily built upon generative models, our framework is expected to be greatly 
impactful for the field of clinical NLP and text mining due to its potentials for wide applications, 
providing a scalable and robust information extraction services.  

While our framework is constructed to be an end-to-end architecture, it is framed as modular, 
which comprises three components, together achieving flexible pipelines for biomedical event 
detection and Question/Answering (QA) system.  

The first component is the text preprocessing module, and the second one is the Deep Learning 
module for Natural Language Understanding (NLU) tasks, and the third one is the post processing 
module.  Notably, machine learning methods in general and Deep Learning in particular outperform 
traditional rule-based approaches in event extraction, as well as other information retrieval 
tasks from biomedical articles. Our framework is to incorporate techniques and ideas from both 
sides of Deep Learning and rule-based approaches for overcoming the novel challenges by using 
machine reasoning. At the same time, our framework is expected to achieve reliable and 
comprehensive performance by combining proven capabilities of conventional NLP tasks with 
existing open source tools and methods.  

During this project, the focused effort is developing an overall infrastructure that can handle 
PubMed datasets, process NLP tasks for preprocessing of inputs and postprocessing of outputs 
for the Deep Learning (DL) module, and manage DL tasks.  Since our direction is to develop 
a QA system and biomedical event detection in the long run, we will exploit existing NLP tools 
and APIs among various open source tools including Stanford CoreNLP, NLTK, OpenNLP, Spacy, Gensim, 
and many others, in order to streamline the required tasks toward key-value based knowledgebase 
for QA, as well as feature extractions for biomedical event detection system.  Note that such 
developed tools and scripts are immediately utilized for post-processing tasks of outputs from 
the DL modules and NLP tasks during the pre-processing step (e.g., generating answers with our 
own Natural Language Generation tools, visualizing results).  

